README.md, before:

# Task-vectoren-for-persona

# Research

## paper:

- PersonalityLens: Visualizing in-depth analysis for LLM-driven personality insights
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cag.2025.104452
Big Five and Myers–Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) auf unterschiedlicher Granularität und in Time
Prompt based classification

- Do LLMs Have Distinct and Consistent Personality? TRAIT: Personality Testset designed for LLMs with Psychometrics
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2406.14703
Big Five and  Short Dark Triad (SD-3)
Finings: "1) LLMs exhibit distinct and consistent personality, which is highly influenced by their training data (e.g., data used for alignment tuning), and 2) current prompting techniques have limited effectiveness in eliciting certain traits, such as high psychopathy or low conscientiousness, suggesting the need for further research in this direction"
Questionare based
classifieres with gpt4 per prompt 



- Overview of psychometrics for LLMs
  https://github.com/ValueByte-AI/Awesome-LLM-Psychometrics
  
- Decoding LLM Personality Measurement: Forced-Choice vs. Likert
  https://aclanthology.org/2025.findings-acl.480.pdf
  Limits of Questionairs and likert scales

  
- WHO IS CHATGPT? BENCHMARKING LLMS’ PSYCHOLOGICAL PORTRAYAL USING PSYCHOBENCH
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.01386
On the Humanity of Conversational AI: Evaluating the Psychological Portrayal of LLMs

https://github.com/CUHK-ARISE/PsychoBench (works as is)
Questionare based with likert scale 

- Evaluating and Inducing Personality in Pre-trained Language Models
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2206.07550
Machine Personality Inventory (MPI) - Questionaire from Big Five etc.


- Personality Alignment of Large Language Models
https://iclr.cc/virtual/2025/poster/31265
identifing relevant attention heads for Personality traits and modifying them 
uses Big Five and SDD-3
https://github.com/zhu-minjun/PAlign
ICLR 2025 Poster 

-
-

Commit message:

Enhance README with personality research details
Updated the README to include detailed descriptions of research papers and findings related to personality in language models.

README.md, after:

# Task-vectoren-for-persona

# Research

## paper:

- PersonalityLens: Visualizing in-depth analysis for LLM-driven personality insights
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cag.2025.104452
Big Five and Myers–Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) auf unterschiedlicher Granularität und in Time
Prompt based classification

- Do LLMs Have Distinct and Consistent Personality? TRAIT: Personality Testset designed for LLMs with Psychometrics
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2406.14703
Big Five and  Short Dark Triad (SD-3)
Finings: "1) LLMs exhibit distinct and consistent personality, which is highly influenced by their training data (e.g., data used for alignment tuning), and 2) current prompting techniques have limited effectiveness in eliciting certain traits, such as high psychopathy or low conscientiousness, suggesting the need for further research in this direction"
Questionare based
classifieres with gpt4 per prompt 



- Overview of psychometrics for LLMs
  https://github.com/ValueByte-AI/Awesome-LLM-Psychometrics
  
- Decoding LLM Personality Measurement: Forced-Choice vs. Likert
  https://aclanthology.org/2025.findings-acl.480.pdf
  Limits of Questionairs and likert scales

  
- WHO IS CHATGPT? BENCHMARKING LLMS’ PSYCHOLOGICAL PORTRAYAL USING PSYCHOBENCH
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.01386
On the Humanity of Conversational AI: Evaluating the Psychological Portrayal of LLMs

https://github.com/CUHK-ARISE/PsychoBench (works as is)
Questionare based with likert scale 




- Personality Alignment of Large Language Models
https://iclr.cc/virtual/2025/poster/31265
identifing relevant attention heads for Personality traits and modifying them 
uses Big Five and SDD-3
https://github.com/zhu-minjun/PAlign
ICLR 2025 Poster 

Evaluating and Inducing Personality in Pre-trained Language Models:
- https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2206.07550
- "We observe a correlation between the internal consistency σ (indicating the existence of personality) and a model’s general capability." p. 6
-  P^2 approach of the authours can induce a "persona" based on prompt
-  P2 = psychologically grounded, chainprompting method that leverages both human trait descriptors and the model’s internal knowledge.
- It produces controlled, consistent personality shifts measurable by MPI.
- σ reduction is critical evidence that these aren’t random answers  the model’s “behavior” becomes more coherent within each trait domain.
- These induced personalities were later confirmed qualitatively through vignette tests with human raters (Section 4.3).
- Evaluating and Inducing Personality in Pre-trained Language Models
- Machine Personality Inventory (MPI) - Questionaire from Big Five etc.

Exploring the Potential of Large Language Models to Simulate Personality
- https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2502.08265
- human annotaions of text for big 5
- **prompt based classifier** (2 step,1. is a marker present, 2. what is the marker)
- Neuroticism is even for human annotaters weak (.50)
- linguistic analyse of lexica
- used comercial models via API
- code availbale at https://github.com/mary-silence/simulating_personality


## Notes?
- - Ist das negativ eines Traits das gegenteil ?
- Multiple persona features können sich gegenseitig aufheben, vlt identifizieren mit Personality Alignment of Large Language Models ?
